 SELF-CARE
 There are four major ways in which the emotionally neglected tend to fall
 down when it comes to taking care of themselves and their own needs, and
 for good reason. Adults who were emotionally neglected as children often
 don’t know what their needs are. Their own wants, needs, and feelings are
 not only irrelevant to the emotionally neglected, they’re invisible. The four
 major areas we’ll talk about here are:
 Part 1. Learning to Nurture Yourself
 Part 2. Improving Self-Discipline
 Part 3. Self-Soothing
 Part 4. Having Compassion for Yourself
 All four of these skills tend to come naturally to people who received
 enough nurturance and discipline from their parents during childhood. If your
 parents had enough compassion and empathy for what you were feeling as a
 child, you will have the same for yourself as an adult. If your parents had
 enough closeness, caring and acceptance in their relationship with you as a
 child, you will most likely have a good capacity for intimate relationships as
 an adult.
 When you grow up emotionally neglected, these abilities which seem to
 come somewhat naturally to others become skills which you have to develop
 in adulthood. Developing a skill takes work. It requires time and conscious
 effort. In this chapter, we’ll talk about what these skills are, what they mean
 and how to cultivate them for yourself. At first each skill may feel foreign
and clumsy as you try it. The key is to keep at it, no matter how it feels. This
 is one of the few times that I will tell you to ignore your feelings! All skill
 development requires persistence, and I promise you that persistence will pay
 off.
 As you read about the skills in this chapter, you’ll see that I’ve devised a
 special tracking sheet, called a Change Sheet for all but one. In working on
 these skills and using the Change Sheets, please be aware that if you try to
 work on all of the skills at once, it could be overwhelming. I recommend that
 you master them one skill at a time, and preferably in the order I’ve presented
 them here. At most, try to take on two at once. Don’t start on another one
 until you’ve mastered the one before it. And if one of them doesn’t seem to
 apply to you, then by all means skip it and go on to one that does seem
 fitting. Be sure to pace yourself, as it’s better to put all your effort into one
 skill than to spread yourself too thinly over multiple ones.
 All of the skills we’ll be talking about in this chapter are challenging to
 master. Many, many people spend years of their lives trying to gain control
 over them. It’s important to give yourself plenty of time, understanding and
 care as you use the Change Sheets. Take pride in your accomplishments.
 When you get off-track, don’t be angry at yourself; just get yourself back on.
 Most likely, you will need some help as you go through this chapter using
 the Change Sheets. Throughout the process, please use my website,
 www.drjonicewebb.com
 , as needed for ongoing support, tips and assistance.
 Self-Care Part 1. Learning to Nurture Yourself
 You may be wondering exactly what this means. The word nurturance could
 have a number of different meanings. Here, I am talking about self
nurturance as taking the steps that are necessary to help yourself have a
 healthy, enjoyable life. If you are healthy and enjoying life, it will open you
 up to have a positive impact on the people around you. Your health and
 happiness will have a ripple effect that will spread to your spouse, children
 and friends and continue outward. As an emotionally neglected person, you
 may already be an excellent caretaker of others. Now it’s time for you to start
 paying attention to your own needs and taking care of yourself. There are four
 steps to learning to nurture yourself. They are:
Step A: Putting yourself first
 Step B: Eating
 Step C: Exercise
 Step D: Rest and relaxation.
 Self-Nurturing Step A: Putting Yourself First
 Let’s start with putting yourself first. What? Did I hear you say that’s selfish?
 It is not! When you are healthy and strong, you’re freed up to give to others
 in a richer, deeper, healthier and stronger way. I like to think of it this way:
 during the flight safety announcements that we rarely listen to, the flight
 attendant cautions that if oxygen masks drop in front of each seat, adults
 should secure their own mask before helping others. This request makes
 perfect sense. You will not be effective in putting on your child’s mask when
 you are struggling to breathe yourself. This rule applies to life in general.
 Once you’re secure and solid yourself, you can help others much more
 effectively.
 When you first start to work on putting yourself first, you may encounter
 resistance. Surprisingly, it will be primarily from the people closest to you.
 Think about it this way: all of the people who know you best expect you to
 behave a certain way. For example, they know you will say yes when they
 ask you a favor. The first time you say no they’ll be taken by surprise. They
 may feel miffed, and they may convey that to you in some way. Please keep
 in mind that this is the normal process of change. Change doesn’t come easily
 to the changer herself or to her loved ones, even when it’s a healthy and
 positive change. Sometimes it helps to explain to the people closest to you
 that you’re working on better self-care and that you may be doing some
 things differently from now on. It may be an adjustment, but anyone who
 truly cares about you will eventually adjust with you, and will probably even
 come to respect you for it.
 To learn how to better put yourself first, it may help to have some
 guidelines, which I’ve listed below. As you work on building this skill, you
 may find some of the guidelines easier to follow than others. As you read
 them, be sure to think about which ones you may need the most help with.
 I’ve included a Change Sheet to help you to work on each one separately.
 Learn to say no.
 No doubt, the people in your life know you pretty well.
They know that you will be there for them, because that’s what emotionally
 neglected people do. Your copious amount of compassion for others makes
 you feel obligated to say yes to requests from your friends, family, children,
 boss. Of course, there is nothing wrong with saying yes. It’s essential for
 positive relationships and progress in life. The problem comes when you feel
 that unless you have a really good excuse to say no to a request, you must say
 yes. As a result, you may end up sacrificing yourself too much by saying yes
 to things that you don’t actually have the time or energy for. It’s very
 important to free yourself from this quandary so that you can make decisions
 that are best for yourself, while also taking others’ needs into consideration.
 A primary rule of assertiveness is that anyone has the right to ask you for
 anything; and you have the equal right to say no, without giving a reason. If
 everyone operated this way, feeling free to ask for help when needed and
 feeling free to say no when desired, the world would be a better place.
 Boundaries would be clearer, and there would be a lot less unnecessary,
 useless guilt floating around. If you feel guilty saying no, or if you find
 yourself saying yes to things because you’re uncomfortable saying no, please
 get a good book on assertiveness (there are many available; see the Resources
 page in the back of this book for my recommendation) and start trying to
 overcome it. Saying no when you need to, free of guilt and discomfort, is a
 vital building block of self-care.
 Reading a book on assertiveness will help you understand and embrace
 the concept so that hopefully you can change your own philosophy. But after
 you change your philosophy, you must follow that up by changing your
 behavior. Use the “Saying No” Change Sheet on the next page to track on a
 daily basis the number of times you say no to requests that are overly
demanding of you.
“Saying No” Change Sheet
 *Record number of times you say ‘no’ per day

As I’ve said before in this book, the more you do something that’s
 foreign, the less foreign it becomes. Gradually, over time it will become a
 normal process and seem to happen on its own with little effort on your part.
 The point of this Change Sheet is not necessarily to increase the quantities,
 since each day will offer a different number of situations in which it’s
 actually appropriate to say no. It’s meant more to help you keep overall track
 of the changes in your behavior. It will also help remind you every day to
 work on it. It’s harder to forget that you’re working on saying no when you
 know that you’ll have to record it that evening.
 Ask for help.
 Asking for help addresses the counter-dependence that can
 be so ingrained in the emotionally neglected person. Remember David, our
 example of counter-dependence in Chapter 3? David had internalized his
 parents’ message, “Don’t have feelings, don’t show feelings, don’t need
 anything from anyone, ever,” and he was living his adult life according to it.
 When you’ve spent your entire life unaware that relying on others is not only
 an option but a necessity, it’s very hard to see it any other way.
 There’s another aspect of asking for help that’s difficult for the
 emotionally neglected to deal with. If it’s hard for you to say no, chances are
 it’s hard for you to ask for help as well. Assertiveness works both ways.
 Emotionally neglected people often live their lives trapped in a Catch-22.
 Since you feel that you must say yes when someone asks you for a favor or
 help, or even extends a social invitation, you naturally assume that others feel
 the same way. Since you don’t want to put others in that bind, you don’t feel
 comfortable asking them for a favor or help. In a world where, in your head,
 nobody can say no to anyone, you are going to lose. These ways of thinking
 make you available to help others but unable to ask others for help when you
 need it. Can you see that this is a no-win system for you?
 To free yourself from this difficult bind, all you have to do is accept that
 other people don’t feel guilty or uncomfortable saying no. Other people have
 an intrinsic understanding of this rule of assertiveness. The huge majority of
 people have little angst about asking for help and little angst about saying no.
 As soon as you can join them, a new world will open up for you.
 Use the following “Asking for Help” Change Sheet to track and make
 yourself aware of your efforts to ask for help more often.
“Asking For Help” Change Sheet
 *Record number of times you ask for help per day

Discover your likes and dislikes.
 When you were growing up, perhaps
 your preferences were not considered often. Questions like “What do you feel
 like doing today?” “Would you rather go to a pizza restaurant or a hamburger
 place?” “Do you want to buy this shirt in green or pink?” “How do you feel
 about that?” Emotionally neglected adults can have great difficulty knowing
 themselves. Remember Josh from Chapter 3, with the unrealistic self
appraisal? Josh had received so few questions like this in his childhood that
 he had no idea as a college student what he was interested in, what he liked,
 or what would be a fitting college major. Depending on the amount and types
 of interest your parents showed you growing up, you may have certain areas
 where you know yourself well, and certain areas in which you’re mystified.
 Here are some questions to help you figure out where you’re lacking in
 knowing your likes and dislikes